## eHealth Systems Africa & Project Sense
 

### Abstract
 
Project Sense is a health systems strengthening suite of tools that is extensively used to manage response on-the-ground during the current Ebola outbreak. The project supports the full workflow of contact tracing, case management, lab result aggregation, burial management, automated reporting, and analytics, as well as call center support and full mobile integration across West Africa. Only through managing the whole data chain can data quality be maintained and a coherent workflow be guaranteed. The Sense tools, developed by eHealth Systems Africa, integrate with the CDC’s EpiInfo VHF system and give operators full control of an easy to use tool to track exposure and enhance communication across the outbreak. Project Sense is not a stand-alone application, but rather it includes a range of coordinating activities in order to implement in the field, in conjunction with local governments & other stakeholders.
 
 
### Introduction
 
The current Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) outbreak poses a wide range of problems for traditional as well as technology-aided response tools. The sheer size of the outbreak, the number of countries involved, and the low level of infrastructure in these countries require a new standard in emergency response. Many existing processes are paper-based, which is error-prone and cumbersome; furthermore, distribution of information captured is often achieved through telephone or by hand-carrying the original paper forms. Many approaches to mitigate these problems with paper are based on standard office solutions like Excel. While initially these tools were a sufficient stopgap, many problems arise from using generic software over a longer period of time. Firstly, validation of data is extremely difficult. Additionally, data distribution, versioning, and collaboration are not supported natively. It is also vital that the right data are provided to the right people in a timely and reliable manner. Network connections can be very bad, especially in severely affected areas, as support staff are affected by the outbreak. So a tool that maintains functionality in offline mode is crucial. Finally, considering the size of the outbreak area it is nearly impossible to conduct a complete surveillance and/or understand every single case in a person-to-person environment.
 
The challenges of this particular Ebola outbreak can be summarized in the following points:

- Large size of outbreak
- Large size of affected area
- Multiple countries affected
- Legacy solutions are paper-based, cumbersome, error-prone
- Standard office solutions not optimal
- Poor network connection & infrastructure
- Fast and secure data flows are vital
 
Modern technology can help in a multitude of ways. Not only can it replace error prone paper-based processes, but it can also streamline the information processing and ensure that users and stakeholders see the relevant information they need to inform decision making. Only a fully integrated solution that maps the whole workflow can achieve sufficient coverage of all the steps to enable a useful response. It is important to see the response as an integrated workflow, with contact tracing at the beginning. If one of the contacts is showing symptoms, then automated notifications have to be sent to a variety of channels. Next, a case investigation has to be triggered with isolation and lab results following. It is of utmost importance that this information is visible as quickly as possible. As the risk of infection in isolation is significantly higher, and if the patient has a different sickness, like malaria for example, a different treatment needs to be realized. If a patient tests positive, his/her next of kin must be informed, and then social mobilization units should be deployed to monitor the patient in his or her environment. All people s/he had direct contact with should then be added to the contact tracing procedure and that process must be error free and that no record is lost. Burial management is another crucial step that needs to be managed and information needs to reach the family so they know the site. Management must also ensure that other people out of the community trust the “service” and don’t hesitate to contact the authorities if someone close to them shows symptoms. Another piece of the work flow, a call center is often the first point of contact that will feed data into the system. All field agents need to be able to dynamically and easily add and maintain data in close coordination with national and regional decision makers. Even though there might be poor internet connectivity, this system has to function which means offline capabilities and opportunistic syncing when a mobile signal is available.

### eHealth Systems Africa

eHealth Systems Africa (www.ehealthafrica.org) is a 501(c)3 non-profit based in Kano, Nigeria that has been providing emergency management support to polio programs across Northern Nigeria. Started in 2009, eHealth Systems Africa (EHA) is focused on improving healthcare by creating effective ways to implement reliable health information management systems. We have developed eHealth and mHealth solutions that can be rapidly deployed to manage patient information, streamline clinical procedures, and provide data and analysis on health program outcomes. To help close the gap in access to health care, we have developed and share a depth of expertise in:

- eHealth and mHealth software and solutions
- technology infrastructure
- training & capacity building for sustainable health systems
- research & data analysis
- project management

We work closely with health NGOs in order to provide them with technology solutions that will enhance their on-going and new health programs.
 
At the beginning of the Nigerian Ebola outbreak response, eHealth Systems Africa was asked to support the Nigerian government with the construction of an emergency operations center (EOC) in Lagos and Port Harcourt, and support the data gathering efforts. It soon became clear that a lot of work was needed in the area of data systems support so eHealth stepped up and started developing a suite of tools that matched the need for the Nigerian response.
 
### Project Sense
 
Project Sense is the next development step from the tools that were developed for the Nigerian response. It is an integrated tool suite that enables all people in the Ebola outbreak response to add, edit, aggregate, visualize, and collaborate on all aspects of data flow that are needed to help in an optimal way. We propagated the idea of a central data store that is replicated on multiple local instances of our document store. Every device holds a copy of all relevant data and as such even enables editing and viewing when the device is currently not connected to the network. Through an innovative two-way sync the data is then updated when the device connects again. Through enforcing one data schemata it is possible to follow one person throughout his infection and always see the most up-to-date information. It is also possible to create a unified alert system. A strong focus is put on supporting data systems that are already in place. If a system is currently in production and working we enable the close integration through automated importers, from Excel, Google documents, VHF, EpiInfo7 and SQL that then import the data and can enhance our unified model.
 
Through using state of the art software and an intelligent build chain, all tools programmed are packable into websites, mobile applications, and desktop programs for Windows/ Mac and Linux. It is vital, through the dynamic nature of such a response, that the software is designed in such a way that it can easily be modified and adapted to the rapid changing requirements.

An important component of the Project Sense tool is implementation. Project Sense is not simply a downloadable application that can then be deployed in the field. It requires an immense effort to coordinate and collaborate with government partners and other stakeholders, along with a large support staff to coordinate logistics, communication and training.
 
### Project Sense & Nigeria
 
Starting with the initial Ebola response in Nigeria it became very clear early on that there are many solutions that focus on one specific aspect of response management. What was missing however was a fully integrated environment. A lot of software is written with an architecture that was missing core features necessary in outbreak response, particularly in low-resource settings where health systems are weak. By being on the ground in Lagos, and talking to the people that were actually using and generating the data, a whole new process was developed to digitize the response efforts that reflected all the needs on the ground.

Contact tracers could use the Sense application on their smartphones to add the data while in the field and the results could be viewed in real time (we procured and distributed smartphones to all contact tracers in Lagos). By geotagging the data, it was possible to check if people were really followed up. It was also possible to generate a multitude of dashboards for various stakeholders and to auto generate notifications to key decision-makers. It was also possible to directly add new contacts while in the field and such network effects could be used to maximize the contact coverage. A further success was the placement of mobile devices into the labs and getting the lab results in real time. For example, the lab technician can take a picture of the result sheet and also add key data. By sending this data to staff at the EOCs in real time, people could be treated far earlier and in the correct way. A recent evaluation found that reporting time that would normally take 12 hours was reduced to nearly real-time within a few days after implementation of the Sense tool.
 
### Project Sense: What’s Next?
 
eHealth Systems Africa is currently extending the Sense tools to be a complete product that can be easily deployed into various scenarios. As our operations have scaled-up to include supporting Ebola outbreak response in Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Guinea, there are many ways we would like to expand the suite to better support outbreak response. For example, we want to be able to offer the tools in multiple languages so other countries can be prepared if Ebola spreads beyond the core countries. We’ve already seen spread to Mali, and a separate outbreak in the Democratic Republic of Congo. We also want to see Project Sense support other outbreak responses situations outside Ebola. For example,  the Marburg outbreak in Uganda could utilize a similar set of tools that Project Sense can provide for outbreak response. We would also like to add more analytical tools so that stakeholders have all the numbers and statistics they need to make important decisions about response efforts. Integration of SMS data flows is another main topic that needs to be solved and is currently heavily investigated. We would also want to integrate resource planning and allocation through which it would be possible to detect outbreaks earlier on and trigger allocation of the needed resources locally. Most importantly though, we want to overwork the interface to be more user-friendly.

Integration of innovative technology into outbreak response protocols is the next step in containing the next big epidemic. eHealth Systems Africa and Project Sense is ready to provide these services to help increase our understanding of the outbreaks, help better track exposure, and enhance communication in emergency situations.
